>> Hi.
I'm Georgia Shakti-Hill.
I am so pleased to welcome you
today to "Living in Balance."
We're going to talk
about harmony and humor
with Chinese medicine,
with the art of qigong.
Come join us.
Learn how you can
live in balance
in mind, body, and spirit.
[THEME MUSIC]
Walter Haley is dedicated
to healing and health.
And he is using harmony
and humor and qigong
and Chinese medicine
to get us there.
He said, the most
important thing is balance.
And so I'd like to welcome
him so he can tell us
about living in balance with a
little bit of humor and harmony
with qigong.
[LAUGHS]
>> Let's hope.
>> Yes.
But you have dedicated your
life to Chinese medicine.
You said, especially
acupuncture,
that you just have found
that it's a wonderful way
to deal with your
patients, with your people.
>> I have.
And the whole concept
of acupuncture
and Chinese medicine
is based on the idea
of being in harmony
with oneself and
with the natural surroundings.
>> Yes.
And it is just a
matter of harmony.
And it is ancient,
it is traditional.
And we're accepting
that in our culture,
and we're learning quite a bit.
Are we not?
>> More and more.
I think Western medicine
is expanding its horizons,
and dropping a lot
of the tunnel vision
that's restricted it for so many
years, and bringing a smile.
>> I was going to say,
[LAUGHS] what is the fun part?
>> Doing it with a smile rather
than fighting and kicking
through the whole process.
>> OK.
So we can have some humor
as we heal ourselves.
>> Oh, absolutely. yeah.
I see so many therapists or
health care practitioners
that leave out one
aspect-- one major aspect
of the whole human experience.
And that's being able to laugh.
Humor.
>> Yes.
>> You know, Dr. Norman Cousins
basically healed himself
watching old Marx Brothers
movies, so he says.
>> And Dr. Bernie Siegel
dedicated his life to it.
There's--
>> Exactly.
>> --tests that have proven.
>> And the Chinese say that even
when you're doing acupuncture
ore when you're doing qigong,
there should be a smile.
In fact, there's a group of
acupuncturists from Japan--
all of these
acupuncturists are blind.
And they practice a
method called Toyo Hari.
And, literally, I
have seen them with--
teaching other acupuncturists.
And they'll have one person
feeling the patient's pulses
from the right hand, and they'll
be on the left hand side.
And they can tell the person
on the right hand side
whether or not they have
a smile on their face
as they're feeling the pulses.
>> Isn't that amazing?
>> Literally.
I know it sounds crazy,
but I've seen this.
>> Oh, no.
I'm a believer.
[LAUGHS]
>> Great.
Great.
>> In fact, it's
like the Dalai Lama.
You always see that smile.
I mean, there is really
a spiritual aspect
to smiling that is very healing,
just in itself, isn't it?
>> It is.
It is.
It absolutely is.
And it starts within.
I laugh at myself every day.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> I wake up laughing and I
try to go to bed the same way.
You've got to hold things
in a certain light.
>> Well, we need to really kind
of let it go and just like,
wasn't that interesting?
[LAUGHS]
>> Yes, exactly.
>> That awful thing
that happened,
wasn't that interesting?
>> Because it's not happening
to you, it's just happening.
And maybe you're the focus
of it at that moment,
but it's happening at other
places in the world, too.
>> And the control that we
have is how we respond to those
things that happen to us.
Yes.
>> Yeah.
That makes all the
difference in the world.
>> So as an
acupuncture physician,
and that is what you are, you
have a couple of favorite books
that you absolutely love.
And I always like to
have recommendations--
>> I do.
>> --on what people might
read if they want to just get
the basics here.
And a couple of
them that you have--
the "Traditional Acupuncture,
the Law of the Five Elements,"
and "All Sickness is Home
Sickness," these two.
>> I'm an avid reader,
especially when it comes
to Chinese therapies.
These two are two
of my favorite.
And then they were written by my
first acupuncture practitioner,
who was also one of the
co-founders of the school
that I went to, a
Dr. Dianne Connelly.
And the first book was actually
her thesis for her PhD.
And it explains the
law the five elements,
which is central to
Chinese medicine,
from the standpoint
of a layperson.
It's not full of
technical jargon.
It's something that you don't
have to be an acupuncturist
to appreciate.
>> Now, you've brought a
chart of the five elements.
And it is the basis for
all of Chinese medicine.
>> Yes.
>> OK, of Chinese philosophy?
>> It's part of the basis.
Of the basis, itself,
is the unity of things.
>> Oh, OK.
>> If you look at Chinese
numerology, you start with one,
the unity of everything.
Two is the first division
and that unity, yin and yang,
complementary opposites, night
and day, male and female,
up, down, right,
left, life and death.
>> Yes.
Again, the balance.
Yeah.
>> From there you move to three,
which is the tension created
between the yin which is Earth,
and yang which is Heaven.
Now, we're stuck in the middle.
We're striving to be
heavenly, and yet we're
rooted to the Earth.
Well, this tension is what
animates life, according
to Chinese medical theory.
Then you have the
four directions.
And after that, you
have the five elements,
which is a cycle of
creation and self-checking.
For instance, you have wood
as one of the elements.
And the next element is fire.
Well, how do you create fire?
You need the fuel of the wood.
>> OK.
So these books that you
especially recommend
would get you
started toward that--
the book on the five elements.
>> Again, without
getting too technical,
it's a good very human way.
It's put into terms of patients
that she's actually treated
and what their
experience was, and how
that person can be examined
looking at the law of the five
elements.
>> But I also love the
title of the other,
which is "All Sickness
is Home Sickness."
>> Yes.
>> But that's home in
another sense, isn't it?
>> Yes.
>> The big home.
>> It carries this right
back to the number one,
the unity of things.
The belief is that
once we separate--
once we don't realize our
place within the oneness
of everything and we separate
ourselves from nature, that's
where illness is created.
>> Yes.
OK.
>> So this is about
going back to the one,
going back to the unity.
>> To the one.
Yes, going home.
>> Going home.
Exactly.
>> When you and I had talked
you said, I use acupuncture.
That is my approach.
But, really, I am a healer.
That is my purpose, and so
what you've found-- what is it
that brought you to choosing
Chinese medicine and qigong?
>> [LAUGHS] We could go
on forever about this.
Personal experience.
I lived in Korea in the
1970s, 1971 and '72,
courtesy of Uncle Sam.
And I was an air
traffic controller,
and I was basically
up in the mountains.
And I got to visit the
temples that were in the area.
It was pretty isolated.
>> Ah.
>> And the more I saw, the
more it gathered my interest.
And I saw acupuncture result
in some amazing turnarounds
for people, healthwise.
And it maintained a spot
somewhere in the back
of my mind over the years.
And I stayed in and out of
it, that in the practice
of Tai Chi and martial arts.
And I was working as a
broker, believe it or not,
at Merrill Lynch.
I can say Merrill
Lynch here, can't I?
>> Sure.
[LAUGHS]
>> And I found myself in
a stressful situation.
And to relieve that
stress or to address it,
I went back to Tai Chi.
And I started thinking,
you know, I'm--
I came to the realization
I'm in the wrong business.
I couldn't sleep at night.
My skin was flaking and red.
And I'd just literally
scratch myself raw.
>> You didn't love your job.
>> I really didn't.
>> No.
>> I hated it, to
be frank with you.
Again, it's yin and yang.
Some people thrive on it.
And--
>> Sure.
>> --I'm just not
one of those people.
So the more I went
back to my old studies,
the more it grabbed me and said,
yes, this is where you belong.
And I went home, so to speak.
>> Yes.
Now you're going to give us some
facts about acupuncture that
would be helpful.
I love this.
I didn't realize that
every single acupuncture
point has a name addressed
to it, like Heavenly Well.
>> Yeah.
The Chinese were-- number
one, the ancient Chinese
didn't have things
that distracted them
from the oneness of nature.
They didn't have cable
TV, and fast food places,
and things like that.
So they were more in
harmony with themselves
and their surroundings.
And through observation, at
length, thousands of years
literally, they realized that
not only was acupuncture good
for pain--
number one, acupuncture
was originally
used as a preventative medicine.
In ancient China, the
health care practitioner
provided the service
and they only
got paid as long as the
patient was healthy.
As soon as the
patient became ill,
they stopped paying until
they became healthy again.
But the ancient Chinese
were very, very observant.
And they realized
that not only were
certain points good
for the physical aspect
of the treatment, but
they also addressed
the mental and emotional states.
So a point like
Heavenly Well is not--
which, it's found right
now the elbow, by the way.
It's not only good
for, say, tennis
elbow and joint situations,
that sort of thing,
but it's a place where mentally
you can go and be refreshed.
It's sort of an
oasis, if you will.
>> Now, we have a chart
that just shows, again,
the meridians, OK, the lines,
the points, and so forth.
And, as you said,
this is just, then--
every single one of
these points have
energy flowing through them.
>> There are 365 points,
which is interesting, 365.
And, actually, depending
on the tradition,
there can be a few extra points.
But the idea is that energy
flows through the body.
It saturates the entire body.
But in the acupuncture
meridians, it's concentrated.
And it flows along
very specific channels.
And at various points
along those channels
it comes close to the
surface of the skin.
And that is where you can access
the energy through acupuncture
needles.
Those are the points.
>> Now, you said the most
significant points are between
the elbow and the fingertips.
>> I can't say one is more
significant than the other,
but these are the points that
are most frequently used--
between the elbow and the
fingertips and the knees
and the toes.
They're what's called
command points.
>> Most frequently used.
>> Yes.
>> OK.
Now, do they relate to
other parts of the body?
Is it like the
reflexology concept, here?
>> They do relate to
other parts of the body.
Someone that has a headache
may get a needle in their leg.
>> OK.
Right.
OK.
[LAUGHS]
>> So, yeah, it depends
on what's called for with
a particular individual.
>> So as you studied
this and you just--
it was just natural to you
and you just felt an affinity
toward this kind of
approach to health?
>> I felt an affinity.
I'm not sure how natural it was.
It's something I've worked at.
I mean, I've really
had to work at it.
If there was some latent talent,
then I had to cultivate it.
It's not something
that sprang up.
And that's the way it
is with some people.
Some people know immediately
what they want to do
and they're very
good at it and it
seems to come natural to them.
Others of us have to work
at developing our skills
a little more diligently.
>> Well, I like the idea,
too, that you had a personal
experience of it when
you were living in Korea,
where you actually saw it used
and you saw the success of it.
>> Yes.
>> And that must have just,
then, kind of stayed with you.
>> It was a friend of mine
who got sick one night.
I think it was a deep fried
chicken that he had eaten.
And he was literally
on his hands and knees
in the fetal position,
crying his eyes out.
And someone came-- they
went out and came back
with this little woman.
And she pulled out a little
black case of needles.
And I don't remember
exactly, but she put them
somewhere near the thumbs
and near his big toes.
>> Wow.
>> And within two minutes,
he was up and around and back
to his old self.
>> Now, we also have
an example here.
And they are little,
and they are tiny.
And you said that we
could just kind of
see this is what the needle's
actually encapsulated in.
So it is a tiny
little needle, but it
is a powerful little needle
then, too, is it not?
>> The typical acupuncture
needle is about an inch long
and about the diameter
of a human hair.
Most people have visions
of hypodermic needles.
And they don't even
want to come see you.
Because a lot of people
this needle phobia.
>> Well, we're going
to take a break.
We need to.
Because we're going to talk
about qigong and you're
going to do a demonstration
for us in the second segment.
>> Absolutely.
>> So we will be right back
with more with Walter Haley
and qigong.
[THEME MUSIC]
Harmony and humor with
Chinese medicine with qigong--
that's what we're doing today in
this program with Walter Haley.
He has a favorite book that he
is sharing with his, "Qigong."
And it is "The Art and Science
of Chinese Energy Healing."
OK.
And you find humor
in the qigong, also?
[LAUGHS]
>> I do.
I do.
I find humor in everything.
>> Good.
OK.
>> At least to some degree
and at various times.
That book was written by Kenneth
Cohen, who is a Taoist priest
living in Colorado.
And I've actually
studied with him,
so I know his philosophy well.
And it's probably the most
comprehensive book on qigong
that I've seen.
And it takes you from
square one to the end.
>> OK.
We have a graphic
that just says chi.
And it is what you said was
like the romanesque approach
to the language, the
Chinese language.
And chi then, C-H-I, is
what most people see.
We think of that is energy.
Is that the definition of chi?
>> Chi actually has a
number of definitions.
Life force is
certainly one of them.
The breath is another.
Anything that has the potential
to animate is, yet, another.
The Chinese idogram for chi
is a pot of rice, boiling.
And the steam
coming off the rice
represents the
energy that's derived
from grain, in this case.
And it moves.
It's the movement of life.
Its animation.
Its being alive.
>> Now qigong is with
the Q-I, is another--
is the preferred
Chinese spelling
of the same thing, the--
>> Right
>> --the Q-I.
>> The first spelling is
what's called Wade-Giles,
which was the first Romanization
of the Chinese language that
was used on a wide basis.
The Chinese came
along and developed
what's called Pinion, which is
their official Romanization.
And they spelled it Q-I.
>> OK.
And what is qigong?
If you were to give us a one
liner on qigong, what is it?
>> The act of cultivating
one's personal energy.
>> Oh, OK.
So you have done a
demonstration with us.
And many people have
seen Tai Chi done,
and they have-- some
have seen qigong.
And what we note about it,
it is in very slow motion.
OK?
>> Yes.
Most qigong exercises
are done very slowly.
There are some that are done
with some rapidity, though.
>> Now, the one
that you have done,
we want the audience
to do along with us.
But what is the
exercise that we're
about to see that
you have done for us?
>> This particular exercise
doesn't have a specific name.
But, in my experience,
it's the one exercise
that I've found where, in a
fairly short period of time--
typically, my classes
are around 20 people.
18 or 19 of the 20 people
will feel their own energy
with this exercise.
And I've never had that
sort of success rate
with any other one exercise in
such a short period of time.
>> Someone in our audience that
does this with you should be
able to feel their own energy.
>> More than likely.
>> So we're going
to watch this now.
And it is in slow,
very slow motion.
Tell us what you're doing now.
>> This is a commencement form.
I am basically gathering my
energy and bringing it down.
Energy has a tendency to rise.
If you think of
heat, heat rises.
So I'm bringing it down and I'm
settling it in what the Chinese
refer to as the dan t'ian, which
translates as-- essentially
as a lower elixir
field or sea of chi.
It's where the energy supposedly
is rooted in the body, right
just below the navel area.
Now, right now
I'm just focusing.
And I'm compacting my chi.
In other words, I'm trying
to concentrate it on the arms
or in my arms.
Right here, I'm crossing my
arms at two strategic points.
Just inside my right
wrist is a point
known as Inner Frontier Gate.
And on the outside of my left
wrist is Outer Frontier Gate.
So I'm drawing in and
giving out energy.
>> That balance, OK.
>> And, here, I'm just
reversing the position.
>> Now, we did that with you.
I was off camera, and a couple
of us participated with you.
And as you're
moving now, tell us
what is this phase,
what you're doing.
>> Another very important
point on the poem called Lesser
Palace.
Different traditions of
acupuncture-- different schools
of acupuncture use slightly
different names, too.
And here I I'm just
pointing my two Lesser
Palaces at each other.
>> Are you not feeling
the energy between them?
>> Oh, I am.
Absolutely.
>> Your chi energy, then, is
focused between your two hands.
>> Yes.
>> OK.
>> And now I'm expanding it.
It's sort of like pulling
taffy in this situation.
>> OK.
And, as we did this, we
were feeling the energy.
And it was our chi that we
were feeling as we were moving.
>> And it's a very
subtle energy,
which is why the movement
is done so slowly.
You can lift weights
or something.
And if you do it fast,
there's a certain energy
involved but it's a gross
energy, where the healing
energy is more subtle.
>> OK.
Now, for someone to do this,
what they would be doing
would be experiencing
that and just noticing
what they're feeling.
Is that what you
would recommend?
>> Yes.
You want to do this
in a quiet place.
You want to do it when you're
in a relative state of calm.
And you want to just
pay real close attention
to any sensation in the
hands or between the hands.
>> And you just planted your
feet and you're just held that
position.
You said that you were just
concentrating your energy,
but it would be healing
to that part of the body
that we refer to as
the trunk of the body.
>> Yes.
This particular exercise
is very good for conditions
that affect the
midline of the body--
digestive problems, heart
conditions, lower tract.
>> Now, we notice your
finger there, too.
>> Yes.
Here, I'm just
focusing the energy.
I'm concentrating it.
The point that ends
at the middle finger
is the point that I refer
to the Inner Palace.
I'm sorry, Lesser Palace.
This is where the channel ends.
Acupuncture channels all begin--
number one, they spiral.
Energy spirals.
>> I noticed that spiral
that you were doing.
Right.
>> If you look at anything as
big as a hurricane all the down
to strands of DNA, there is
a spiraling into the energy.
This particular
energetic channel
ends at the middle finger.
And the yin channels end
and the yang channels
begin at least, on
the hand, in this way.
And that's where the
energy is most volatile.
So it's most easily affected
by using those points.
>> Now, at the end
you're coming--
you're holding the energy here.
>> Yes.
I'm refocusing and calming.
And, again, I want to keep
the energy from going up.
So I'm literally grabbing
it and pulling it back down.
And then I'm going to embrace
it and bring it back down
to the-- again, the
lower dan t'ian.
>> And you did rush
through this a little bit.
You would normally
have done it slower.
>> This is probably done
about twice as fast as I would
normally do it.
And it's usually
done bilaterally.
In other words, the
process is mirrored
with the opposite side.
>> Because of that
concept of balance.
>> Yes, exactly.
>> OK, exactly.
And the dan t'ian is where
you store the energy,
and that's we always
bring the focus back to.
>> Yes.
>> OK.
>> There is a point just below--
an acupuncture point just below
the navel called Sea of Chi.
Chi being energy--
that's where it's rooted.
>> Yes.
Now Tai Chi-- people are
seeing that more offered
in places like YMCAs
and that sort of thing.
What is the difference
between Tai Chi and qigong?
Tai Chi is actually
a type of qigong.
The Chinese government
says that as of 1997, there
were 37,000 different
qigong forms and exercises.
Tai Chi is simply one of them.
The basic difference in Tai Chi
and most other forms of qigong
is the repetition that
you find with qigong
that is not normally
found so much in Tai Chi.
>> Why does this heal?
What is it about this
particular type of movement
in this way of
concentrating our focus that
is very helpful for us?
>> Due to the tensions
of day-to-day life,
we tense our muscles, the
stresses, and it literally--
a tense body will
stop the flow of chi.
By relaxing and calming
with these slow movements
you allow the muscles
and joints to relax.
The energy flows more smoothly.
>> I'm glad that you have
brought this energy to us.
And we appreciate
the demonstration.
>> And they smile while
they do it, by the way.
>> Oh, OK.
[LAUGHS]
>> That's key.
That's key.
>> Yes.
>> OK.
So we must be smiling as
we're moving through this.
>> Yes.
>> OK.
>> You also have a
newsletter that people,
if they wanted to be
in touch with you,
could get your newsletter, too.
So what we're going
to do is we're
going to give you a way that
you can be in touch with Walter.
[THEME MUSIC]
Walter Haley has found
a way that he can share
and he can serve other people.
He has found that Chinese
medicine, and especially
qigong, are very powerful
for harmony, and for humor,
for health, and for healing.
We appreciate that.
Until next time, I'm
Georgia Shakti-Hill.
May you be well,
happy and peaceful.
And may you have humor.
[THEME MUSIC]